Network Fundamentals: A Practical Overview
Welcome to a quick guide on essential networking concepts, useful tools, and real-world tips. Whether you're just getting started or need a refresher, this doc covers the basics with clarity and purpose.

What is a Network?
A network is simply a group of connected devices—like computers, servers, or routers—that can share information and resources. Networks can be tiny (two laptops sharing files) or massive (like the internet itself).

What is a Subnet?
A subnet (short for subnetwork) breaks a large network into smaller, manageable chunks. This:

Keeps traffic organized

Improves performance

Boosts security by isolating devices

Think of it as dividing a busy highway into local streets.

What is Port Forwarding?
Port forwarding lets outside devices access services inside your private network (like a game server or a home web server). It’s like telling your router, “When someone knocks on port 80, forward them to this specific device.”

Antivirus Limitations
Most antivirus software can’t scan inside password-protected files (like encrypted ZIPs or locked Word docs). That means:

Malware can hide there undetected

Antivirus scans might miss threats

Tip: Never open password-protected files from unknown sources!

User Account Control (UAC) in Windows
UAC helps stop apps from making changes to your system without your approval. It:

Prompts for permission on important changes

Runs apps as regular users by default

Helps prevent malware from taking control

UAC Levels:
Always Notify: Most secure

Default: Notifies when apps try changes

No Dimming: Same as default, but friendlier UI

Never Notify: Not recommended

Have I Been Pwned (HIBP)
Created by security expert Troy Hunt, this free tool lets you:

Check if your email or password was exposed in a data breach

Look up pastes containing your data

Search breaches by domain

Use an API to integrate checks into your apps

Website: https://haveibeenpwned.com

Wayback Machine
The Wayback Machine is an internet archive that allows you to:

View old versions of websites

Recover lost or deleted pages

Research how sites have changed over time

Website: https://archive.org/web

What’s an API?
An API (Application Programming Interface) lets software systems talk to each other. It defines how apps can request or send data.

Common API Types:
REST: Simple and widely used

GraphQL: Flexible queries

SOAP: Heavier, more strict

WebSocket: Real-time communication

Use Cases:
Connect services (e.g., payment gateways)

Power mobile apps

Automate tasks with scripts

.env Files
.env files store environment variables like API keys, secrets, and config settings. This helps:

Keep sensitive data out of your code

Customize settings per environment (dev, prod, etc.)

Best Practices:
Never commit .env files to Git

Add them to .gitignore

Validate required variables at startup

Nmap Cheat Sheet (Kali Linux)
Nmap is a go-to tool for network scanning and security audits.

Handy Flags:
Flag	Purpose
-Pn	Skip host discovery
-A	Aggressive scan (OS, version, scripts, traceroute)
-sV	Detect service versions
-O	Detect operating system
--script	Use built-in scripts (e.g. vuln)
-p-	Scan all 65,535 ports
-p 80,443	Scan specific ports
-sS	Stealthy SYN scan
-vv	Verbose output

Examples:
bash
Copy
Edit
nmap -A -p- target.com
nmap -sS -p 80,443 target.com
nmap --script vuln target.com
TCP vs UDP: What’s the Difference?
Feature	TCP	UDP
Connection	Yes (3-way handshake)	No
Reliability	Guaranteed	Not guaranteed
Ordering	Yes	No
Speed	Slower	Faster
Use Cases	Web, file transfer, email	Streaming, gaming, DNS

Rule of thumb:

Use TCP when reliability matters (e.g., websites)

Use UDP when speed is key (e.g., live video)

IPv4 vs IPv6: What's the Deal?
Feature	IPv4	IPv6
Address Size	32-bit	128-bit
Format	192.168.0.1	2001:0db8::1
Addresses	~4.3 billion	340 undecillion
Broadcast	Yes	Replaced with multicast
Security	Optional	Built-in with IPsec

Summary:

IPv4 is still widely used for compatibility

IPv6 is scalable and built for the future

MAC Address: Your Device’s Digital Name Tag
MAC = Media Access Control

Unique hardware address assigned to network interfaces

Format: 00:1A:2B:3C:4D:5E

Used for device identification and communication in local networks

Note: Can be spoofed, so don’t rely on it for secure authentication.

Conclusion
This guide covers the essentials of networking, security, and tools you'll encounter in real-world setups. Feel free to fork, contribute, or customize it for your own use.

